                                                                            Artificial Life Manuscript Submission

                                                  Flow-Lenia: Emergent evolutionary dynamics in mass conservative
                                                                  continuous cellular automata 1


                                              Erwan Plantec 1 , Gautier Hamon 2 , Mayalen Etcheverry 2 , Bert Wang-Chak Chan 3 ,
                                                                 Pierre-Yves Oudeyer 2 , Clément Moulin-Frier 2
                                                                    Corresponding: Erwan Plantec (erpl@itu.dk)




arXiv:2506.08569v1 [nlin.CG] 10 Jun 2025
                                              1. IT University, REAL lab, Copenhagen, Denmark
                                              2. Flowers AI & CogSci Lab, Inria Center of the University of Bordeaux, France
                                              3. Google DeepMind, Tokyo, Japan
                                              1
                                                This manuscript has been accepted for publication in the Artificial Life journal (https://direct.mit.edu/
                                           artl) (Plantec et al., 2025)
Abstract.      Central to the artificial life endeavour is the creation of
artificial systems spontaneously generating properties found in the living
world such as autopoiesis, self-replication, evolution and open-endedness.
While numerous models and paradigms have been proposed, cellular au-
tomata (CA) have taken a very important place in the field notably as they
enable the study of phenomenons like self-reproduction and autopoiesis.
Continuous CA like Lenia have been showed to produce life-like patterns
reminiscent, on an aesthetic and ontological point of view, of biological
organisms we call creatures. We propose in this paper Flow-Lenia, a mass
conservative extension of Lenia. We present experiments demonstrating
its effectiveness in generating spatially-localized patters (SLPs) with com-
plex behaviors and show that the update rule parameters can be optimized
to generate complex creatures showing behaviors of interest. Furthermore,
we show that Flow-Lenia allows us to embed the parameters of the model,
defining the properties of the emerging patterns, within its own dynamics
thus allowing for multispecies simulations. By using the evolutionary ac-
tivity framework as well as other metrics, we shed light on the emergent
evolutionary dynamics taking place in this system.


Keywords:       Cellular automata, Artificial evolution, Origins of life,
Lenia, Open-ended evolution, Evolutionary activity




                                     2
        a Lenia System                                        ●   Class of CA , diversity of patterns, but mostly unstable
                                                              ●   No mass conservation
                                                              ●   Difficult optimization landscape



                                                                    θ¹      θ²        Patterns from random parameters

       b Flow-Lenia System

                                                                   ●     Class of CA, diversity of patterns
                                                          ●        ●     Conservation of mass
                                                                   ●     Mostly Spatially Localized Patterns (SLPs)
                                                                   ●     Easily optimized with Evolutionary Strategies (ES)
                                                                   ●     Local params for “Multi species” simulations


       c Random search
       ●   Mostly SLPs
       ●   Statics and dynamic patterns
       ●   Complex behaviors


       d Optimizing the rule for certain behaviors Directed motion Chemotaxis                      e Environmental
                                                                                                   constraints (e.g food)
                             Evolutionary
                              Strategy
                  t=0                       t=500   Fitness
                               Rollout



       f Multi species simulations, with competition for mass                 f.2) Resulting evolutionary tree




                                                                              → Intrinsic evolution

Figure 1: We present Flow-Lenia, an extension of the Lenia (a) continuous Cellular Automata
(CA). Flow-Lenia (b) introduces a built-in constraint for mass conservation, strongly facil-
itating the discovery of life-like patterns (c), the optimization of the system parameters to-
wards certain behaviors (d) and the introduction of environmental constraints (e). Moreover,
it allows to embed the system parameters within its own local dynamics, leading to large-
scale multi-species simulations analysed in the light of the Evolutionary Activity framework
(f). (a) Lenia system. The growth U t is computed with kernels K and growth functions
G. A small portion of the growth is then added to activations At to give the next state At+dt .
(section 2). (b) Flow-Lenia system. U t is computed as in Lenia and interpreted as an
affinity map. The flow F t is given by combining the affinity map and activation gradients.
The next state is obtained by “moving” matter in the CA space according to the flow F t
using reintegration tracking. (section 3). Inset on the right of (a,b) shows 7 patterns ob-
tained with randomly sampled update rules parameters, in Lenia (top, resulting mostly in
non-SLP or empty patterns) and Flow-Lenia (bottom, resulting mostly in SLP patterns). (c)
Random search. Patterns emerging from random parameter sampling in Flow-Lenia are
qualitatively analyzed (sections 4.1 and 5.1). (d) Optimizing the system update rule is
performed using simple evolutionary strategies with respect to predefined fitness functions,
resulting in creatures with specific behaviors (e.g directed motion or chemotaxis). (sections
4.2 and 5.2). (e) Environment constraints. Example of environment with food (blue)
that creatures can consume to gain mass. (f ) Multi species simulations. Snapshots of
a large scale multi-species simulation enabled by the parameter embedding mechanism (sec-
tion 3.1), resulting in a evolutionary tree (f.2) (section 5.3).
                                                 1
1     Introduction
Cellular automata (CA), notably Conway’s Game of Life (GoL) (Adamatzky, 2010), have
attracted a lot of interest from the artificial life (ALife) community because of the emer-
gence of life-reminiscent spatially-localized patterns (SLPs). These patterns are of special
interest as instances of autopoietic structures (i.e self-produced and self-maintained struc-
tures) (Beer, 2004), a fundamental property of life and cognition as proposed in Maturana
and Varela theory (Maturana & Varela, 1991). Recently, Lenia, a generalization of GoL to
the continuous domain has been proposed (Chan, 2019, 2020). Previous studies with this
system have shown the emergence of autopoietic SLPs, also called “creatures”, often resem-
bling microscopic life-forms and displaying various behaviors like motility or self-replication.
Moreover, Lenia displays a much wider diversity of emerging patterns than previous sys-
tems such as GoL. Such observations have made Lenia a particularly interesting system for
studying the emergence of life-like phenomenon and even sensori-motor capabilities (Hamon
et al., 2024). Importantly, these artificial creatures bear a deep similarity to their biological
counterparts as enacted agents endowed with constitutive autonomy (i.e creatures showing
self-constitution, self-maintenance and some level of behavioral functionality) as described
by enactive theories of cognition (see Froese and Ziemke (2009) for a more complete discus-
sion on enactive artificial intelligence).
However, those patterns are quite difficult to find, necessitating complex fine-tuned search
algorithms in order to find update rule parameters allowing the emergence of interesting pat-
terns (e.g spatially localized patterns). Complex and resilient creatures, displaying features
of sensorimotor agency, have been found in Hamon et al., 2024 using intrinsically motivated
goal exploration processes (IMGEP) and gradient descent.
Another important challenge in artificial life (ALife) and artificial intelligence (AI) is about
the design of systems displaying open-ended intrinsic evolution (i.e unbounded growth of
complexity through intrinsic evolutionary processes) (Stanley, 2019). Such a process is called
intrinsic since no final objective (i.e fixed fitness function) is set by the experimenter, the
fitness landscape is intrinsic to the system and depends only on its current state, as in nat-
ural evolution where there is no final goal (Lehman & Stanley, 2011). Seminal works by
Von Neumann and Ulam in 1951 have paved the way in this direction. They were particu-
larly interested in building an universal self-reproducing cellular automata (CA) capable of
achieving open-ended evolution (Von Neumann & Burks, 1966) quickly followed by Codd’s
attempt (Hutton, 2010). Further developments in this direction have quickly followed with
Langton’s self-replicating loops, a simpler model of self-replication in CA’s, at the cost of
its universality (Langton, 1984). Even though, Langton’s loops were able to self-replicate,
no variations could be introduced in the process, thus making the emergence of evolution
impossible. Fifteen years after Langton’s self-replicating loops, the goal of obtaining an evo-
lutionary process was achieved by Hiroki Sayama with the Evoloops model which displays
Darwinian evolution of self-reproducing Langton’s like loops (Sayama, 1999) (see Sayama
and Nehaniv, 2024 for a more complete account of works on evolution and CA). Emergent
evolutionary dynamics have also been studied in the context of neural cellular automata
(Mordvintsev et al., 2020; Sinapayen, 2023) and artificial chemistry (Kruszewski & Mikolov,
2022).
However, such systems rely on hand-defined rules, specific structures and controlled settings,

                                               2
ultimately limiting the diversity of patterns that can emerge in the system. On the other
hand, even though Lenia creatures display greater diversity, different creatures are governed
by different update rules, therefore cannot co-exist in the same world (i.e the same sim-
ulation) and cannot interact. Obtaining such an evolutionary process in a CA could be
achieved by embedding information in the system locally modifying the update rule and so
the properties of emerging creatures, like a genome, enabling multi-species simulations. Such
simulations might set the stage for evolution to occur in populations of patterns each with
their own update rule and parameters. However, achieving it in CA like Lenia is still an
open problem.
One very important problem related to this objective is how can one actually measure these
emergent evolutionary processes. Two main difficulties exist here. First, in such complex
self-organized systems, fitness is intrinsic, i.e there is no externally nor well defined fitness
function, thus, one cannot have an objective measure of how adapted an individual is (if
there is even a notion of individual). Evolutionary pressures are intrinsic to the system,
where self-organised structures have to maintain their own integrity through cooperation
or competition with other structures. Secondly, such a measure of evolution should be ap-
plicable to a wide range of systems and so rely on as few assumptions about the studied
system as possible, fundamental desiderata if one’s objective is to study life-as-it-could-be.
The framework of evolutionary activity (M. A. Bedau & Packard, 1996; Droop & Hickin-
botham, 2012) proposed different measures aiming at discerning whether or not evolution is
taking place, and quantifying it, in an observed system. Such measures have been applied
to artificial systems such as Tierra (Ray & Hart, 1999) and Avida (Adami & Brown, 1994)
and has even been used to compare their dynamics to real-world data (M. Bedau et al.,
1998). Importantly, such a measure, or ensemble of measures, could allow to define a clear
optimization objective for ALife researchers.
We believe that adding mass conservation is a key ingredient to address the aforementioned
challenges. Such a constraint could (i) restrict emerging creatures to spatially localized ones,
(ii) allow for the design of multi-species simulations and (iii) provide an important evolu-
tionary pressure (Hickinbotham & Stepney, 2015). Conservation laws have been thought has
fundamental laws for Darwinian evolution to take place (Shkliarevsky, 2019). We propose
in this work a mass-conservative extension to Lenia called Flow-Lenia and demonstrate that
such conservation laws effectively facilitate the search for artificial creatures by constraining
(almost all) emerging patterns to spatially localized ones. We also show that the update rule
parameters can easily be optimized using vanilla evolutionary strategies (Salimans et al.,
2017) with respect to some fitness functions to obtain patterns with specific properties such
as directed or angular motion. Importantly, we show that the Flow-Lenia formulation enables
the integration of the parameters of the CA update rules within the CA dynamics, making
them dynamic and localized, allowing for multi-species simulations, with locally coherent
update rules that define properties of the emerging creatures. By describing trajectories of
parameters over large timescales as well as by using measures of evolutionary activity (M. A.
Bedau & Packard, 1996; Droop & Hickinbotham, 2012) and diversity, we evaluate the evo-
lutionary dynamics emerging from these multi-species simulations. Moreover, we show that
this system is relevant for testing ecological theories of evolution by studying two variations
of the vanilla model, one based on dissipative dynamics, and one with resources that crea-
tures need to consume for their survival. The study of the role of dissipative dynamics in this

                                               3
setting is motivated by dissipation having been proposed as one of the four pillars of “lyfe”,
a more general definition of life (Bartlett & Wong, 2020). Introducing dissipative dynamics
of the Flow-Lenia system could lead to the emergence of more interesting evolutionary dy-
namics characterized by higher evolutionary activity measures. On the other hand, resource
limitations coupled to a shared pool of resources might create important selective pressures
bootstrapping the intrinsic evolutionary process leading to higher evolutionary activity.
This paper comes with associated with a companion website https://sites.google.com/view/
flow-lenia showing videos of the system dynamics, as well as open-source code directly exe-
cutable in an online notebook 2 .


2         Lenia
We here shortly describe the Lenia system, whose dynamics is illustrated Figure 1.a. For
a more detailed explanation, see Chan, 2019, 2020; Plantec et al., 2023. Let L be the
support of the CA, here a two-dimensional grid defining the set of cells as well as their
spatial relationships. The state of the Lenia system at time t is then defined by the map
At : L → [0, 1]C where C is the number of channels of the system. The system update rule
is then defined by the tuple
                         R    < K, G, c1 , c0 , A0 > where K is a set of convolution kernels with
Ki : L → [0, 1] satisfies L Ki = 1 and G is a set of growth functions with Gi : [0, 1] → [−1, 1].
Each pair (Ki , Gi ) is associated to a source channel ci0 it senses and a target channel ci1 it
updates. Connectivity can be represented through a square adjacency matrix M of size C
where Mij ∈ N is the number of kernels sensing channel i and updating channel j. A0 is the
initial state of the system. As in Hamon et al. (2024), kernels are radially symmetrical and
defined as a sum of concentric Gaussian bumps :
                                       k
                                                                        !
                                      X                ( rixR − ai,j )2
                             Ki (x) =      bi,j exp −          2
                                                                                              (1)
                                      j=1
                                                             2wi,j

Where ai , bi , wi and ri are parameters defining kernel i. k is a parameter defining the number
of rings per kernel (set to 3 here) and R is a parameter common to all kernels defining the
maximum neighborhood radius. Each kernel is then defined by 3×k +1 parameters. Growth
functions are defined as Gaussian function scaled in the range [−1, 1]:

                                                   (µi − x)2
                                                            
                                 Gi (x) = 2 exp −               −1                           (2)
                                                      2σi2

Where µi and σi are parameters of growth function i so each growth function is defined by
2 parameters. A step in Lenia is defined by the following steps (see figure 1 (top)) :
    1. Compute the growth at time t given the actual state At :
                                             |K|
                                             X
                                     Ujt =         hi · Gi (Ki ∗ Atci ) · [ci1 = j]             (3)
                                                                     0
                                             i=1

    2
        https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1l-Og8xRlc5ew0489swuud0Me7Sc5bCss?usp=sharing


                                                        4
      Where h ∈ R|K| is a vector weighting the importance of each pair (Ki , Gi ) and [ci1 = j]
      is the Iverson bracket which equals 1 if ci1 = j and 0 otherwise (i.e equals 1 if the ith
      pair updates channel j).
    2. Add a small portion of the growth U t to the actual state At to get the state at the
       next time step and clip results back to the unit range :

                                        At+dt
                                         i    = [Ati + dt Uit ]10                            (4)


3     Flow-Lenia
Flow-Lenia extends the Lenia system in the sense that it reuses all the aforementioned com-
ponents. We propose for this system to interpret activations as concentrations of “matter”
in all cells and to refer to the term U t , previously called the growth in Lenia, as an affinity
map. The idea is that the matter will greedily move towards higher affinity regions by fol-
lowing the local gradient of the affinity map U , ∇U : L → R2 . To do so, we define a flow
F : L → (R2 )C , which can be interpreted as the instantaneous speed of matter, as:
                               (
                                Fit = (1 − αt )∇Uit − αt ∇AtΣ
                                                                                             (5)
                                αt (x) = [(AtΣ (x)/βA )n ]10

With AtΣ (x) = C        t                                                t
                 P
                   i=1 Ai (x) the total mass in each location x. Here ∇Ui is the affinity gra-
dient for channel i. The negative concentration gradient −∇AtΣ is a diffusion term to avoid
concentrating all the matter in very small regions akin to the clipping in Lenia which up-
per bounds concentrations. In practice, gradients are estimated through Sobel filtering. The
map α : L → [0, 1] is used to weight the importance of each term such that −∇AtΣ dominates
when the total mass at a given location is close to a critical mass βA ∈ R>0 . Intuitively,
the result is that matter is mainly driven by concentration gradients in high concentrations
regions and is more free to move along the affinity gradient in less concentrated areas. We
typically use n > 1 such that the affinity gradient dominates on a larger range of masses.


Finally, matter can be displaced in space according to flow F giving us the state at the next
time step. To do so we use the reintegration tracking method proposed in (Moroz, 2020).
Reintegration tracking is a semi-Lagrangian grid based algorithm thought as a reformulation
of particle tracking in screen space (i.e grid space) aimed at not losing information (i.e
particles) which happens when two particles end up in the same cell. The basic principle is
to work with distribution of particles (i.e infinite number of particles) and conserve the total
mass by adding up masses going on a same cell. Overall, reintegration tracking can be seen
as a grid-based approximation to particle systems with infinite number of particles having
the property to conserve total mass. Thus, Flow-Lenia can be seen as a new kind of model
at the frontier between continuous CA and particle systems. A particle based model directly
inspired by the Flow-Lenia formulation has been recently proposed in Mordvintsev et al.



                                                5
Figure 2: Calculation of incoming matter to cell p ∈ L through reintegration tracking (Moroz,
2020). Mass contained in cell at location p′ ∈ L is moved to a square distribution D centered
on p′′ = p′ + dt · F t (p′ ). The proportion of mass from p′ arriving in p is then given by the
integral of D on the cell domain of p, Ω(p), denoted as I(p′ , p).


(2022). Figure 2 illustrates how reintegration tracking is used in our case. The resulting
update rule (animated in this video 3 ) is the following :
                                 (
                                  At+dt   (x) = x′ ∈L Ati (x′ )Ii (x′ , x)
                                                P
                                     i
                                                                                             (6)
                                  Ii (x′ , x) = Ω(x) D(x′′i , s)
                                               R


With x′′i = x′ + dt · Fit (x′ ) the target location of the flow from x′ in channel i. Ω(x) is the
domain of cell at location p, which is a square   R of side 1. D(m, s) is a distribution defined
on L with mean m and variance s satisfying L D(m, s) = 1, which is in practice a uniform
square distribution with side length 2s centered at m. This distribution emulates a flow of
particles from source area Ω(x′ ) to target area D(x′′ , s), where the distribution D emulates
Brownian motion at the low level. s is an hyperparameter of the system which can be seen
as form of temperature. The reintegration tracking method is depicted in Fig. 2. Since
the distribution D integrates to 1, it is clear that a cell cannot send out more mass than it
contains nor less and so the system conserves its total mass. For computational reasons, we
do not look at all cells to compute incoming matter as described by equation 6 but only at
the neighborhood composed of cells whose Chebyshev distance to the target cell is less than 5
(extended Moore neighborhood) allowing for considerably reduced computation times. Mass
conservation also implies that cells’ states are no longer bound to the unit range but can
be any positive real valued number (S ≡ RC       ≥0 ). This model has been implemented in JAX
(Bradbury et al., 2018) allowing fast simulation on GPU (255µs ± 3.11µs per step on Tesla
T4 GPU with 1 channel, 10 kernels and 128 × 128 world size).
  3
      https://sites.google.com/view/flowlenia/model




                                                      6
3.1    Flow-Lenia with parameters embedding
Flow-Lenia formulation, by considering a flow of matter, allows to attach any information to
the moving matter such as the update rule parameters making them dynamic and localized.
Formally, this comes to define a parameter map P : L → Θ where Θ is the parameter
space. In this work, only the kernel weighting vectors h are included in the parameter
space Θ ≡ R|K| . This map can then be used to compute the affinity score in each cell x
by weighting the influence of each pair (Ki , Gi ) with the localized vector P (x) giving the
following formula:

                                      |K|
                                      X
                        Ujt (x) =            Pit (x) · Gi (Ki ∗ Atci )(x) · [ci1 = j]       (7)
                                                                   0
                                       i=1

While in theory, all the parameters could be embedded in the parameter map, this would
come with high memory and computational costs for some. In particular, changing the
kernels parameters dynamically would make the use of fast convolution operations such as
fast-Fourier convolution impossible as it would require using different kernels in all different
locations of the map.
We can now move the parameters along with the matter during the reintegration tracking
phase. This necessitates deciding what to do when different set of parameters arrive in a same
cell. Different versions of the mixing rule have been proposed in Plantec et al., 2023 either
based on averaging incoming parameters or sampling one based on quantities of incoming
matter. In this work, we use the latter one which is defined by the following equation for
the stochastic version:

                                                                   t   ′   ′
                               t+dt              t   ′   eA (x )I(x ,x)
                         P[P          (x) = P (x )] = P        At (x′′ )I(x′′ ,x)
                                                                                            (8)
                                                       x′′ ∈L e

This comes to sampling one of the parameters where probabilities for each cell to be se-
lected are given by the softmax distribution computed from associated incoming quantities
of matter. We also used a deterministic version of this rule where the softmax sampling is
simply replaced by an argmax. However, when not stated otherwise, the method we use is
the stochastic sampling. We chose this rule because of the competitive dynamics it creates in
the system. It enables creatures to convert mass from other creatures with different parame-
ters (i.e other species). This would not be possible with the average rule as each interaction
would create a new set of parameters.


4     Experimental methods
The experiments are divided into three main parts. First, we perform random search in the
Flow-Lenia parameter space allowing us to qualitatively analyze the dynamics of the system
and the typical patterns emerging from it. In a second part, we optimize the update rules
parameters as well as the initial pattern configuration in order to obtain creatures displaying
specific behaviors. Finally, we experiment with the parameters embedding mechanism and

                                                         7
analyze the long-term temporal dynamics emerging from these multi-species simulations.
Each of these experiments are explained in detail in sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 respectively,
and the associated results are presented in section 5. Methods and results from random and
directed search experiments are also presented in more details in Plantec et al., 2023.

4.1    Random search experiments
We performed random search in the Flow-Lenia parameter space described in table 1. We
refer the reader to sections 2 and 3 for further details on the role of these parameters.
Associated results are presented in section 5.1.

                           Neighborhood            Growth functions
                         R    ∈ [2, 25]            µ ∈ [0.05, 0.5] *
                         r    ∈ [0.2, 1]   *       σ ∈ [0.001, 0.2] *
                              Kernels                   Flow
                         h     ∈ [0, 1]    *       s     0.65
                                      3
                         a    ∈ [0, 1]     *       n       2
                         b    ∈ [0, 1]3    *       dt     0.2
                                         3
                         w ∈ [0.01, 0.5] *

Table 1: Flow Lenia explored parameter space. Parameters marked with a * must be sampled
for each kernel-growth function pair.


4.2    Directed search experiments
We used evolutionary strategies (Salimans et al., 2017) to optimize the update rule param-
eters and the initial configuration A0 . We trained the model with respect to four different
user-defined fitness functions, i.e tasks: directed motion, angular motion, navigation through
obstacles and chemotaxis. We refer the reader to Plantec et al. (2023) for further details
about the employed fitness functions. We used EvoSax (Lange, 2022) implementation of
the OpenES (Salimans et al., 2017) strategy with population size of 16 and Adam optimizer
(Kingma & Ba, 2017) with 0.01 as learning rate. We optimized the Flow Lenia update rule
with different number of kernels and either 1 or 2 channels. For comparison, we also trained
original Lenia on the directed motion task following the same optimization procedure. The
initial pattern is composed, as in random search, of a square patch with non-zero activations
placed at the center of the world and zeros everywhere else.

4.3    Intrinsic evolution experiments
In order to analyze the potentially evolutionary dynamics enabled by the parameters embed-
ding mechanism presented in section 3.1, we performed simulations with larger spatial and
temporal scales. A similar attempt using the original Lenia system for large-scale simulation
of intrinsic evolution was described in (Chan, 2023). By allowing multispecies simulations,
the parameters embedding mechanism also allows for interspecies competition especially un-
der the stochastic parameter selection rule described in equations 7 as it allows species to

                                               8
convert matter from other species. We further propose two variations of the vanilla model,
namely the dissipative and food models. During simulation, the set of unique parameters
denoted P t ≡ {P t (x)}x∈L is recorded.PTogether with parameters, we record their associated
total mass through time M (p, t) = x∈L AtΣ (x) · [P t (x) = p]. We also introduce a diver-
sity metric D(t) quantifying the diversity of parameters and which is defined as the average
distance between all present parameters in the system at this time t:

                                          1 X X
                                D(t) =                ||p − p′ ||2                           (9)
                                         |P t | t ′ t
                                             p∈P p ∈P


Where || · ||2 is the euclidean norm. We only recorded simulation data every 100 steps for
memory reasons. However, as interesting creatures’ behaviors unroll in around 100 time
steps, evolutionary dynamics must happen on much larger scales. The simulation settings
as well as the three different models are described in more details in the following sections.

4.3.1   Simulation settings
All presented models have been simulated for 500 · 103 steps. The system is initialized with,
when not stated otherwise, 3 channels and 5 kernels per channel pair making a total of 45
kernels. We introduce mutations in the form of square “beams” affecting a random 10 × 10
patch in the grid. Beams apply a perturbation sampled from a normal distribution with
mean 0 and unit variance to the parameter map P , the perturbation being the same for all
cells in the affected patch. While we could have implemented mutations on single cells only,
it would have been unlikely for any mutation to have the opportunity to develop as they
would be quickly overtaken by their neighbors. Affecting larger zones using beams gives a
mutation better chances of developing. Mutation rates are controlled by the parameter pmut
which is the probability of a mutation beam appearing at each time step. All simulations
have been repeated with 5 different random seeds.

4.3.2   Model variations
We propose in this work three different variations of the Flow-Lenia model namely: vanilla,
dissipative and food which are presented here after.

Vanilla In this setting, the environments is simply initialized with 64 creatures. Each
creature is initialized as a 20 × 20 square patch which position is uniformly sampled on the
grid L. Matter concentrations (A) in these patches are also sampled uniformly in [0, 1] and
parameter (P ) is sampled following a normal distribution and set identically for all cells in
a patch.
In this setting, high fitness parameters are the ones leading to creatures able to preserve
and increase their associated mass. Note that here, creatures can only grow by converting
matter from other creatures. This creates pressures for strong individuality, especially with
the stochastic update rule, as it incentives creatures to protect their resources. But strategies
that are too defensive, preventing a parameter set from expanding (i.e gaining mass and


                                                9
territory), might put it at risk as it might make it more vulnerable to disappear because of
a random mutation beam.

Dissipative In the dissipative setting, the world is initialized in the same way as the vanilla
setting and mutations are also used in the same way. The difference is that in this setting
we regularly remove matter and the associated parameters and add new ones, thus creating
dissipative dynamics. To do so, we use two new types of beams, one removes matter and
parameters in the affected patch, the other adds a new creature (i.e a patch with random
parameters, as in the initial pattern) at another affected location sampled in a 100 × 100
corner of the grid, the input zone, with randomly initialized parameters. The new creature
is initialized in the same way as the initialization phase. The rate at which the dissipative
beams appear is controlled by parameter pdiss .
We expect the dissipative setting to create more interesting evolutionary dynamics character-
ized by higher evolutionary activity measures (see section 4.3.3) by creating an environment
with a constant input of novelty in the form of new parameters while conserving more stable
zones in the environments (i.e the ones further from the input zone).

Food In this last setting, we use the food mechanism displayed in figure 1 and presented
in Plantec et al., 2023. Creatures see their mass constantly decaying at a fixed rate rdecay .
We then introduce a new map Ψ : L → [0, ∞) defining the presence of food for each cell
in the world. We also add kernels sensing the food map enabling creatures to sense food.
When matter and food are present in a same cell, then food is going to be transformed into
matter at a rate rdigest . The food map is initialized with 32 5 × 5 food squares (where value
of the map is set to 1 for all cells in the patch) randomly sampled on the grid. At each time
step, a new food patch is added with probability pf ood .
In this model, a high fitness creature is one able to counter its constant decay by either
converting matter from other creatures (i.e being a predator), or consuming food resources.
Such a constraint for creatures, creating a need to find food for their continued existence,
together with a common pool of resources, might create strong evolutionary pressures and
competitive dynamics, bootstrapping the emergence of evolutionary processes in the system.
Moreover, the addition of the food constraint and the necessity to counter-act their decay
introduce the notion of a minimal criterion, i.e a criterion creatures must met in order to
expand, which has been proposed as a fundamental ingredient for open-ended evolution to
emerge (Soros & Stanley, 2014; Taylor, 2015).

4.3.3   Measuring evolutionary activity
Multiple measures of evolutionary activity have been proposed in literature. In this work,
we use two different measures, namely count-based evolutionary activity (EAC ) and non-
neutral evolutionary activity (EAN ) (Droop & Hickinbotham, 2012). Evolutionary activity
metrics are based on records of the presence and counts of different components in a system.
Components can be for instance molecules or species. In our case, the components are
the different parameters, meaning that a component, or species, is a unique point in the
parameter space. Hence, two set of parameters with infinitely small differences are considered
as different species, regardless of their phenotypic outcome. This is a current limitation of

                                              10
the study as discussed in the section 6. We here use both parameters sets P t and associated
masses M to compute component level activities aC             N
                                                   p (t) and ap (t) for count-based and non-
neutral activities respectively. Count-based activity is based on the total mass associated
to a given set of parameters. At each time step, the count-based activity of a component is
incremented by its total associated mass if this component exists:


                            aC         C                             t
                             p (t) = (ap (t − 1) + M (p, t)) · [p ∈ P ]                       (10)

Where [x] is the Iverson bracket which equals 1 if x is true and M (p, t) is the mass associated
to species p at time t.
Intuitively, the greater the total mass of a parameter p is, and the longer it survives, the
higher will be its activity ap . While count-based activity can give useful insights, it does
not tell much about the quantity of change happening in the environment. Non-neutral
activity solves this issue by penalizing periods of stasis. Here, the activity of a component is
incremented by the square of the change of its proportion in the population of components if
it increased. Hence, if multiple components stay very stable, i.e reach a stable equilibrium,
their activities will remain constant. However, if a component sees its proportion in the
population going up then its activity will increase. This measure thus prevent periods of
stasis from contributing to the evolutionary activity measure. This is formally defined by
the following set of equations:

          N          N                 N                 t
         ap (t) = (aP
                     p (t − 1) + ∆p (p, t)) · [p ∈ P ]
                                   ′
           ∆N
            p (t) = (
                                                                 2
                          p′ M (p , t)) · (ρ(p, t) − ρ(p, t − 1)) · [ρ(p, t) > ρ(p, t − 1)]   (11)
         ρ(p, t) = P M (p,t)
         
                              ′
                        ′ M (p ,t)
                        p



Global activity at a given time isPsimply defined as the sum of all components activities at
this same time step: EA∗ (t) = p (a∗p (t)) where ∗ is either C or N for count-based and
non-neutral evolutionary activities respectively.


5     Results
5.1    Random search
By performing random and manual search of the Flow Lenia parameter and hyperparameter
space described in table 1 we have been able to discover SLPs with already interesting and
complex behaviors some of which are displayed in figures 3 and 4.
Most of the patterns generated in Flow Lenia are SLPs (see figure 3(a)) with rare exceptions
found by manually setting parameters to specific configurations leading to scattered matter.
We can see in figure 4(b) that the same parameters mostly lead to empty or exploding
patterns in the Lenia system. Using multiple kernels led to the emergence of SLPs with
more complex shapes and behaviors. While part of emerging patterns tend to be static ones,
dynamic patterns are quite common in Flow Lenia. For instance gyrating SLPs (Fig. 4.a) or
snake like patterns (b) with complex motion emerging from attraction/repulsion dynamics

                                                  11
                                       (a) Flow-Lenia




                                         (b) Lenia

Figure 3: Patterns obtained from 105 different randomly sampled update rule parameters in
(a) FLow-Lenia and (b) Lenia systems. Each pattern is obtained by simulating the systems
for 150 steps from an initial state composed of a 40 × 40 patch with uniformly sampled
concentrations. The exact same 105 parameter sets are used for both systems.


can be frequently observed. Dividing and merging dots (c) resembling reaction-diffusion
patterns are also a common pattern. Timelapse (d-f) shows a creature with complex and
unpredictable dynamics emerging from the interactions of its membrane, multiple organoids-
like structures and a central nuclei ultimately leading to a phase transition happening in
(e). Timelapse (g-i) shows a 2-channels creature displaying complex division patterns and
interesting modular creatures whose characteristics change depending on their total mass
while being of the same “kind” (i) (see 5 creatures on the leftmost part of (i)). Note that
multi-channel creatures often show more complex dynamics and patterns with very modular

                                            12
                        (a)                  (b)                  (c)




                        (d)                  (e)                   (f)




                        (g)                  (h)                   (i)




                                             (j)

Figure 4: Flow Lenia creatures. (a-c) Samples of creatures found through random search in
Flow Lenia parameter space. (d-f) and (g-i) Timelapses of patterns found through random
search. Colors in (g-i) code for different channels. (j) Effect of changing temperature in
Flow Lenia, temperature is linearly increasing from left to right. Videos are available at
https://sites.google.com/view/flow-lenia.


shapes where each channel seems to occupy a different role. (j) shows the effect of changing
the size of the reintegration tracking distribution s (see equation 6 and figure 2), parameter
we call temperature. Here temperature is linearly increasing from left to right showing very
different phases of the systems. More interestingly, patterns at the frontier between the
Turing-like phase (center) and the equilibrium phase (right) are much more dynamic and
display unpredictable dynamics suggesting a critical regime.


                                             13
                                                             (b)                  (c)




                                                             (d)                  (e)
                        (a)

Figure 5: (a) Results of evolutionary optimization. C is the number of channels of the
system and k is the number of kernels and growth functions. When performing the exact
same optimization for directed motion in the original Lenia system (yellow curve), not only
optimization is unstable but it only discovers exploding patterns. (b-e) Creatures found
through optimization. (b) Directed motion with 2 channels and 20 kernels. (c) Angular
motion with 2 channels and 20 kernels. (d) Motion through obstacles with 2 channels
and 25 kernels. (e) Chemotaxis with 2 channels and 25 kernels. Videos are availabe at
https://sites.google.com/view/flow-lenia.


5.2    Optimizing Flow Lenia creatures
Flow-Lenia update rule parameters can also be easily optimized so to generate patterns
with specific behaviors. This is a difficult task in Lenia as it would require constantly
monitoring the existential status and the spatially-localizedness of evolved creatures. Thus
training creatures in Lenia requires to define characterizations of creatures accounting for
such properties which is a far from trivial problem. Moreover, even if one can come up
with proxies to find spatially localized patterns, the optimization process remains difficult
necessitating advanced optimization methods like curriculum learning (Hamon et al., 2024).
In Flow Lenia, the spatial localization constraint is intrinsic to the system thus removing
the necessity to account for it when searching for creatures.
Using evolutionary strategies (Salimans et al., 2017) we have been able to find creatures
solving various tasks such as:

Directed motion The creature is able to move as fast as possible in one direction. Effi-
cient solutions can be found in the 2 channels condition but not in the single channel case.
However, when running the optimization algorithm for longer (e.g 5000 generations), we

                                             14
have been able to find single channel creatures with similar fitness than their 2 channels
counterpart. Increasing the number of kernels led to faster discovery of good solutions. The
best performing creature is shown in figure 5(b). This creature moves because of attrac-
tion/repulsion dynamics between the 2 channels which might explain why directed motion
is much easier to attain with multi-channels creatures. On the other hand, the optimization
of the original Lenia model is much less stable and discovered patterns are less successful
than their mass-conservative counterparts. Moreover, every Lenia optimized patterns are
exploding ones.

Angular motion The creature is able to maximize its straight line speed as well as to
make turns. The best performing creature, shown in figure 5 (c), displays very complex
internal dynamics leading it to periodically make 180° turns while moving in straight line
the rest of the time. These dynamics seem to be generated by attraction repulsion dynamics
like the ones observed in directed motion but here in a more intricate morphology.

Navigation through obstacles The creature is able to maximize its traveled distance
while multiple obstacles are placed on its way. We have been able to successfully train crea-
tures able to move and maintain their integrity when making contact with walls such as the
one shown in figure 5 (d) which is able to resist deformation and find a way out the “forest”.
In comparison, solving a similar task in Lenia required complex optimization methods based
on curriculum learning, diversity search and gradient descent over a differentiable CA (Ha-
mon et al., 2024). However, such a comparison is difficult because Flow Lenia creatures are
inherently more robust due to conservation of mass, whereas Lenia creatures can disappear
because of perturbations.

Chemotaxis The creature is able to follow a concentration gradient, encoded in a separate
channel and which it is able to sense through some kernels, towards its source. The best
solutions such as the one shown in figure 5 (e) are perfectly able to climb the gradient towards
its maximum.
For further details on the optimization procedure, we refer the reader to Plantec et al., 2023.

5.3    Intrinsic evolutionary dynamics
Snapshots of sampled simulations can be seen in figure 6. In all settings we tried, we visually
observed changes in the set of parameters present in the environment through time, often
with some species taking over others, leading to extinctions, and mutations giving rise to new
species able to survive. We also observe interesting interspecies dynamics where different
parameters form stable structures without competing which can be seen as some form of co-
operation or symbiosis. It should be noted that the general appearance of simulations highly
depends on the parameters of the system, i.e the kernels and growth function parameters
which stay fixed during simulation. While some simulations are visually appealing to us,
displaying creatures with different scales and behaviors, other might look much more chaotic
with only very small dot-like creatures creating poorly human-readable dynamics.
In order to analyse how the parameters evolve through time and move in the parameter

                                              15
                                          (a) Vanilla




                                        (b) Dissipative




                                           (c) Food

Figure 6: Snapshots of simulations for the vanilla (a), dissipative (b) and food model (c).
Colors are defined by the parameter map while intensity is set by concentrations of matter.
(a) shows a very large and stable green structure, instance of a larger scale creature. Videos
of different simulations are available in the associated website https://sites.google.com/view/
flow-lenia
                                              16
                          (a)                                   (b)




                                             (c)

Figure 7: Visualization of Flow-Lenia evolutionary trajectories through projection in the
parameter subspace formed by the principal components of the set P of parameters having
existed during the simulation. (a) and (b) show two different evolutionary trees obtained from
simulations of the food model (a) and vanilla model with deterministic parameter mixing
rule (b). Colors are coding for time (from purple to red) showing for instance two branches
having survived and one which went extinct in (a). (c) is an alternative visualization of the
data in 2 dimensions where the x axis is the first principal component, the y axis is the time
axis, colors code for the second principal component obtained from a simulation with the
vanilla model.




                                             17
Figure 8: Evolution of the number of different parameters through time for different mutation
rates pmut . (left) The number of different parameters is plotted against time where error
bands correspond to the standard deviation over 5 different runs. (right) The average number
of different parameters over time is plotted against pmut .


space, we first obtained the subspace of maximal variation of the parameter space through
Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Principal Components were fitted with the complete
set of parameters having existed through simulation P ≡ ∪0≤t≤T P t , where P t is the set
of parameters present in the world at time t. Then, we can visualize trajectories in the
parameter space by projecting the set of parameters present at each timestep P t in this
subspace. Example of a trajectories are shown in figure 7. Interestingly, we can notice that
motion in this space looks far from random and take the form of a tree, an evolutionary
tree. We can see the formation of different branches which could be seen as instances of spe-
ciation. This differentiation clearly indicates the presence of an intrinsic fitness landscape.
We also observe that trees obtained from simulations with the deterministic sampling rule
for parameters (see sections 3.1) have much thinner branches and distinctive trajectories.
Interestingly, the stochastic sampling rule only adds more stochasticity in the interactions
between species, not on the parameters, indicating that these trajectories are effectively pro-
duced by an intrinsic fitness landscape seemingly sharper under the deterministic sampling
rule (i.e with less noise in the intrinsic fitness of a creature). It is important to note that
these dynamics are clearer for higher mutation rates pmut because they produce much more
different parameters as mutations are the only way of introducing new parameters in the
system. However, when looking at the relationship between the total number of parameters
|P| and the mutation rates, as shown in figure 8, we can see that they relate sub-linearly.
This indicates the presence of competitive dynamics in the system, since without compe-
tition the number of parameters will necessarily increase linearly with the mutation rate.
Interestingly, after a rapid growth, the number of different parameters tend to stay very
stable through time and this for all the different values of pmut also indicating the presence
of intrinsic regulation mechanisms.
When measuring evolutionary activity of the system, we also notice large differences when
varying the mutation rates in the vanilla setting as shown in figure 9. Importantly, results
show a rapid decline of evolutionary activity measures for greater mutation rates where the

                                              18
Figure 9: Evolutionary activity measures through time for different mutation rates pmut in
the vanilla model. Intuitively, the greater the total mass of a parameter p is, and the longer
it survives, the higher will be its count-based activity ; with an additional penalization for
stasis for the non-neutral activity (see section 4.3.3 for formal definitions). Measures of non-
neutral (top) and count-based evolutionary activity (bottom) are shown. (left) Evolution of
the evolutionary activity is shown as a function of time, dotted lines show the best fitting
linear model. The inner plots show the the slopes of these models against their respective
mutation rates pmut , dashed lines indicate best fitting power function. (right) Average values
of evolutionary activity over time are plotted against mutation rates, dashed line shows the
best fitting power function.


relation is best fitted by a power law with slope γ = −0.5 (R2 = 0.75) for non-neutral
activity and γ = −0.71 (R2 = 0.71) for count-based activity. These results are consistent
with results from Droop and Hickinbotham (2012) where they observed declines of evolu-
tionary activity for too high mutation rates. When expressing the evolutionary activities as
a function of time for different mutation rates, all of the curves are better fitted by a linear
model. The slopes of these fitted curves are higher for low mutation rates and when plotting
the slope of the curve over the mutation rate (figure 9) we can observe a decay following a
power function.


When comparing the vanilla, dissipative and food models respective evolutionary activities
we observe that dissipative and food models display significantly higher evolutionary activ-
ities for both count-based and non-neutral measures (p < 10−5 for both, Mann-Whitney
test). The dissipative model also shows higher evolutionary activity than the food model
(p < 10−5 for both, Mann-Whitney test). However, one should note that in the case of the
food and dissipative models, total mass in the environment is not ensured to stay constant.
This creates a bias in the evolutionary activity measures which takes mass into account.
When removing the total mass effect by dividing the evolutionary activity by the total mass
in the environment, we obtain the opposite relationships. We especially observe much lower

                                              19
Figure 10: Comparison of non-neutral (top), count-based (middle) evolutionary activities
and diversity (bottom) for the vanilla, dissipative and food models. (left) Metrics are plotted
as a function of time for each model. For the evolutionary activity, inner plots shows the
corrected measures (divided by total mass in the environment). (right) Distributions of
respective metrics for each model (estimated through kernel density estimation).


measures in the dissipative case in comparison to the other two models. While the vanilla
model shows higher score than the food model when corrected activity is averaged over all
time steps, we can see similar values in the end of simulations indicating a slower rise for
the food model. Diversity measures (see figure 10, bottom) show striking differences where
the dissipative model produces much less diversity than the other two. This might seem
counter-intuitive as of the three it is the only one inputing new parameters. However, since
the parameter map is never regularized, intrinsically evolving parameters can take any value
which might be way out of the distribution from which we sample new parameters (N (0, 1)).
The food model shows a quicker rise in diversity in comparison to the vanilla model but
also stabilizes quicker while the vanilla model displays a steady constant linear growth of
diversity.


6    Discussion
Due to the mass conservative nature of Flow Lenia, most of patterns do not grow indefi-
nitely into spatially global patterns (i.e patterns that diffuse on the entire grid, also called
Turing-like patterns), therefore SLPs are much more common and easier to find. This is an

                                              20
important difference from the previous versions of Lenia, where one needs to search or evolve
for patterns that are both non-vanishing and non-exploding, and to constantly monitor their
existential status. Here, the mass conservation constraint acts as a regularizer on the kinds
of patterns that can emerge.
Even though patterns generated by Flow Lenia are often static or slowly moving, we have
been able to find creatures with complex dynamics from random search only which would
be a difficult task in Lenia as most of the search space corresponds to either exploding or
vanishing patterns. Furthermore, we have shown that the update rule parameters can be
optimized with simple evolutionary strategies to generate patterns with specific properties
and behaviors such as locomotion, chemotaxis and navigation through obstacles. Doing so in
Lenia is a difficult task since the spatial localization of emergent patterns is not guaranteed
necessitating more complex algorithms accounting for such a property.
Finally we showed that the Flow Lenia system allowed for the integration of the update rule
parameters within the CA dynamics allowing for the coexistence of multiple update rules,
and thus different creature or species, within the same simulation. The quantitative and
qualitative analysis of trajectories of parameters through time, as well as the application of
evolutionary activity metrics (Droop & Hickinbotham, 2012) and diversity metrics allowed
us to shed light on the intrinsic evolution taking place in larger spatio-temporal scale simu-
lations of this system. Intrinsic evolution, i.e evolution without externally defined stationary
fitness function, is a particularly important feature of life as it supports its open-endedness
through mechanisms such as niche construction.
We argue that such multispecies simulations represent an important step towards the design
of emergent microcosms (Arbesman, 2022) in which could emerge intrinsic, maybe open-
ended, evolutionary processes through inter-species interactions. Whereas environment de-
sign is poorly addressed and quite challenging in cellular automata systems, we believe that
it is crucial to study the emergence of agency and cognition in those systems as argued in
Godfrey-Smith (2002) and shown in Hamon et al. (2024). By proposing different environ-
ment designs inspired by theories about origins of life and evolution, we have been able to
study the evolutionary influences of such variations. By enabling the design of complex en-
vironmental features like inter-species interactions, walls, food or temperature, Flow-Lenia
could represent a particularly interesting system to study theories on the origins of life or
ecological theories of the evolution of complexity and cognition (Moulin-Frier, 2022; Nisioti
et al., 2021).
Lot of exciting roads remain to be taken in order to fully capture the value of complex
self-organized systems such as Flow-Lenia and explore their potential as models for studying
theories about life, cognition and evolution. While we showed that evolutionary activity
metrics are applicable to the Flow-Lenia system with minimal modification, we have shown
that EA measures are able to characterize the effect of different experimental conditions
(vanilla, dissipative and food) on the resulting evolutionary dynamics. In evolutionary bi-
ology and theories on the origins of life, the presence of a dissipative mechanism as well of
limited shared resources are considered as key drivers of open-ended evolution in the natural
world. However, our results show an inverse tendency compared to these predictions, where
the EA of the dissipative and food conditions are lower than in the vanilla systems. This is
an interesting illustration of the interest of quantitive models such as Flow-Lenia, encourag-
ing the formal definition of such mechanisms and measures. Our results show that common

                                              21
predictions on the origins of life actually strongly depends on their specific instantiation,
since in our current model we actually observe the inverse tendency. However, we think that
more improvements have to be made here. In particular, our working definition of species,
i.e a specific point in the parameter space, might not fully capture what species are in our
system. Looking at the distribution of parameters revealed the ubiquitous presence of clus-
ters coherently moving in the high dimensional space of parameters with occasional divisions
(i.e branchings). We believe that the correct definition of a species in Flow-Lenia might lie
in these coherent clusters which might, through the scope of evolutionary activity metrics,
shed new light on Flow-Lenia evolutionary dynamics. Another important contribution could
also be to take into account the phenotypic outcomes of the parameters in the definition
of species. Beside the notion of species, the definition of individuals could be reframed, or
refined, as we often observe in simulations stable structures one would identify as an indi-
vidual creature in the system but which are composed of elements defined by different set
of parameters. While evolutionary theories have for a long time thought about genes as the
fundamental unit of selection, recent theories propose that the individual, or agent, should
be seen as the fundamental unit of evolution (Levin, 2023). Further study using Flow-Lenia
might benefit investigating new methods for defining these individuals, for example using
information theoretic measures of individuality (Krakauer et al., 2020). Also, while measures
of evolutionary activity represent a great tool for getting insights into the complex emerging
dynamics of Flow-Lenia, other measures could be adapted and used in this setting. For
instance, Patarroyo et al. proposed a framework based on assembly theory (Sharma et al.,
2023) aimed at quantifying the open-endedness of discrete CA (Patarroyo et al., 2023).
In conclusion, we believe that Flow-Lenia represents an important step towards the realiza-
tion of open-ended evolutionary dynamics in silico. By enabling great diversities of creatures
to emerge, interact and evolve in complex large-scale environments, Flow-Lenia could lead
to the emergence of complex cognition in the most as-it-could-be sense of the term. These
emerging dynamics might shed new lights on studies about origins of life and cognition.


References
Adamatzky, A. (2010). Game of Life Cellular Automata.
Adami, C., & Brown, C. T. (1994, May). Evolutionary Learning in the 2D Artificial Life
       System ”Avida”. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.adap-org/9405003
Arbesman, S. (2022, December). Emergent Microcosms.
Bartlett, S., & Wong, M. L. (2020). Defining Lyfe in the Universe: From Three Privileged
       Functions to Four Pillars. Life, 10 (4), 42. https://doi.org/10.3390/life10040042
Bedau, M., Snyder, E., Brown, C. T., & Packard, N. (1998). A Comparison of Evolutionary
       Activity in Artificial Evolving Systems and in the Biosphere.
Bedau, M. A., & Packard, N. H. (1996). Measurement of Evolutionary Activity, Teleology,
       and Life.
Beer, R. D. (2004). Autopoiesis and Cognition in the Game of Life. Artificial Life, 10 (3),
       309–326. https://doi.org/10.1162/1064546041255539




                                             22
Bradbury, J., Frostig, R., Hawkins, P., Johnson, M. J., Leary, C., Maclaurin, D., Necula,
       G., Paszke, A., VanderPlas, J., Wanderman-Milne, S., & Zhang, Q. (2018). JAX:
       Composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs.
Chan, B. W.-C. (2019). Lenia - Biology of Artificial Life. Complex Systems, 28 (3), 251–286.
       https://doi.org/10.25088/ComplexSystems.28.3.251
Chan, B. W.-C. (2020). Lenia and Expanded Universe. The 2020 Conference on Artificial
       Life, 221–229. https://doi.org/10.1162/isal a 00297
Chan, B. W.-C. (2023). Towards Large-Scale Simulations of Open-Ended Evolution in Con-
       tinuous Cellular Automata. Proceedings of the Companion Conference on Genetic and
       Evolutionary Computation, 127–130. https://doi.org/10.1145/3583133.3590670
Droop, A., & Hickinbotham, S. (2012). A quantitative measure of non-neutral evolution-
       ary activity for systems that exhibit intrinsic fitness. ALIFE 2012: The Thirteenth
       International Conference on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems, 45–52.
       https://doi.org/10.1162/978-0-262-31050-5-ch007
Froese, T., & Ziemke, T. (2009). Enactive artificial intelligence: Investigating the systemic
       organization of life and mind. Artificial Intelligence, 173 (3), 466–500. https://doi.
       org/10.1016/j.artint.2008.12.001
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2002). Environmental complexity and the evolution of cognition. In The
       evolution of intelligence (pp. 223–249). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Hamon, G., Etcheverry, M., Chan, B. W.-C., Moulin-Frier, C., & Oudeyer, P.-Y. (2024,
       February). Discovering Sensorimotor Agency in Cellular Automata using Diversity
       Search. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.10236
Hickinbotham, S., & Stepney, S. (2015). Conservation of Matter Increases Evolutionary
       Activity. ECAL 2015: The 13th European Conference on Artificial Life, 98–105. https:
       //doi.org/10.1162/978-0-262-33027-5-ch024
Hutton, T. J. (2010). Codd’s self-replicating computer. Artificial Life, 16 (2), 99–117. https:
       //doi.org/10.1162/artl.2010.16.2.16200
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2017, January). Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.
       https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980
Krakauer, D., Bertschinger, N., Olbrich, E., Flack, J. C., & Ay, N. (2020). The information
       theory of individuality. Theory in Biosciences, 139 (2), 209–223. https://doi.org/10.
       1007/s12064-020-00313-7
Kruszewski, G., & Mikolov, T. (2022). Emergence of Self-Reproducing Metabolisms as Re-
       cursive Algorithms in an Artificial Chemistry. Artificial Life, 27 (3–4), 277–299. https:
       //doi.org/10.1162/artl a 00355
Lange, R. T. (2022, December). Evosax: JAX-based Evolution Strategies. https://doi.org/
       10.48550/arXiv.2212.04180
Langton, C. G. (1984). Self-reproduction in cellular automata. Physica D: Nonlinear Phe-
       nomena, 10 (1), 135–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2789(84)90256-2
Lehman, J., & Stanley, K. O. (2011). Novelty Search and the Problem with Objectives. In
       R. Riolo, E. Vladislavleva, & J. H. Moore (Eds.), Genetic Programming Theory and
       Practice IX (pp. 37–56). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-1770-5 3
Levin, M. (2023). Darwin’s agential materials: Evolutionary implications of multiscale com-
       petency in developmental biology. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, 80 (6), 142.
       https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-023-04790-z

                                              23
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1991, August). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization
        of the Living. Springer Science & Business Media.
Mordvintsev, A., Niklasson, E., & Randazzo, E. (2022, December). Particle Lenia and the
        energy-based formulation.
Mordvintsev, A., Randazzo, E., Niklasson, E., & Levin, M. (2020). Growing Neural Cellular
        Automata. Distill, 5 (2), e23. https://doi.org/10.23915/distill.00023
Moroz, M. (2020, August). Reintegration tracking.
Moulin-Frier, C. (2022, December). The Ecology of Open-Ended Skill Acquisition [Thesis].
        Université de Bordeaux (UB).
Nisioti, E., Jodogne-del Litto, K., & Moulin-Frier, C. (2021). Grounding an Ecological Theory
        of Artificial Intelligence in Human Evolution. NeurIPS 2021 - Conference on Neu-
        ral Information Processing Systems / Workshop: Ecological Theory of Reinforcement
        Learning.
Patarroyo, K. Y., Sharma, A., Walker, S., & Cronin, L. (2023). AssemblyCA: A Benchmark
        of Open-Endedness for Discrete Cellular Automata. Second Agent Learning in Open-
        Endedness Workshop.
Plantec, E., Hamon, G., Etcheverry, M., Chan, B. W.-C., Oudeyer, P.-Y., & Moulin-Frier, C.
        (2025). Flow-Lenia: Emergent Evolutionary Dynamics in Mass Conservative Contin-
        uous Cellular Automata. Artificial Life, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1162/artl a 00471
Plantec, E., Hamon, G., Etcheverry, M., Oudeyer, P.-Y., Moulin-Frier, C., & Chan, B. W.-C.
        (2023). Flow-Lenia: Towards open-ended evolution in cellular automata through mass
        conservation and parameter localization. ALIFE 2023: Ghost in the Machine: Pro-
        ceedings of the 2023 Artificial Life Conference. https://doi.org/10.1162/isal a 00651
Ray, T., & Hart, J. (1999). Evolution of differentiated multi-threaded digital organisms.
        Proceedings 1999 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
        tems. Human and Environment Friendly Robots with High Intelligence and Emotional
        Quotients (Cat. No.99CH36289), 1, 1–10 vol.1. https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.1999.
        812972
Salimans, T., Ho, J., Chen, X., Sidor, S., & Sutskever, I. (2017). Evolution Strategies as a
        Scalable Alternative to Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1703.03864 [cs, stat].
Sayama, H. (1999). Toward the realization of an evolving ecosystem on cellular automata.
        Proc. Fourth Int. Symp. Artificial Life and Robotics, 254–257.
Sayama, H., & Nehaniv, C. L. (2024, February). Self-Reproduction and Evolution in Cellular
        Automata: 25 Years after Evoloops. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.03961
Sharma, A., Czégel, D., Lachmann, M., Kempes, C. P., Walker, S. I., & Cronin, L. (2023).
        Assembly theory explains and quantifies selection and evolution. Nature, 622 (7982),
        321–328. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06600-9
Shkliarevsky, G. (2019). Conservation, Creation, and Evolution: Revising the Darwinian
        Project. Journal of Evolutionary Science, 1 (2), 1–30. https://doi.org/10.14302/issn.
        2689-4602.jes-19-2990
Sinapayen, L. (2023). Self-Replication, Spontaneous Mutations, and Exponential Genetic
        Drift in Neural Cellular Automata. ALIFE 2023: Ghost in the Machine: Proceedings
        of the 2023 Artificial Life Conference. https://doi.org/10.1162/isal a 00591
Soros, L., & Stanley, K. (2014). Identifying Necessary Conditions for Open-Ended Evolution
        through the Artificial Life World of Chromaria. ALIFE 14: The Fourteenth Inter-

                                             24
       national Conference on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems, 793–800.
       https://doi.org/10.1162/978-0-262-32621-6-ch128
Stanley, K. O. (2019). Why Open-Endedness Matters. Artificial Life, 25 (3), 232–235. https:
       //doi.org/10.1162/artl a 00294
Taylor, T. (2015, July). Requirements for Open-Ended Evolution in Natural and Artificial
       Systems. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1507.07403
Von Neumann, J., & Burks, A. W. ( W. (1966). Theory of self-reproducing automata. Urbana,
       University of Illinois Press.




                                            25
